Add quickstart docs for dataset workflow (#403)
kolenaIO/kolena: docs/dataset/quickstart.md

# :kolena-flame-20: Quickstart

Install Kolena to set up rigorous and repeatable model testing in minutes.

> In this quickstart guide, we'll use we will use the [300 Faces In the Wild (300-W)](https://ibug.doc.ic.ac.uk/resources/300-W/)

Reviewer: > we'll use we will use

example dataset to demonstrate the how to curate test data and test models in Kolena. The examples

> use data located in a public S3 bucket `s3://kolena-public-examples`

Reviewer: Sentence fragment

## Installing `kolena` Python SDK

=== "`pip`"

    ```shell
    pip install kolena
    ```

=== "`poetry`"

    ```shell
    poetry add kolena
    ```

## Clone the examples

> 

Reviewer: I'd move this into a callout — most users will do the easiest thing (not cloning our repo) and most readers will skip over callouts

The [kolenaIO/kolena](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena) repository contains a number of example integrations to clone
and run directly:

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

- [:kolena-keypoint-detection-20: Example: Keypoint Detection ↗](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/tree/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection)

    ![Example image and five-point facial keypoints array from the 300 Faces in the Wild dataset.](../assets/images/300-W.jpg)

    ---

>     End-to-end face recognition 1:1 using the [Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)](http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/lfw/) dataset.

Reviewer: Missing a blank line here — will render side-by-side as cards when there is a blank line:

<img width="807" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-04 at 2 16 37 PM" src="https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/assets/9648886/99538589-6525-4f97-b172-0d979b43b97e">

Reviewer: Thinking more about this, we should be OK to omit entirely. This has been annoying to keep up-to-date (images are not uniform in appearance, size, or dark mode/light mode support) and doesn't add a ton of value over listing a few examples and pointing to the public repo

- [:kolena-chat-20: Example: Question Answering ↗](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/tree/trunk/examples/dataset/question_answering)

    ![Example questions from CoQA dataset.](../assets/images/CoQA.jpg)

    ---

    Question Answering using the
    [Conversational Question Answering (CoQA)](https://stanfordnlp.github.io/coqa/) dataset
</div>

Now, let's set up the keypoint detection example:

```shell

> cd kolena/examples/object_detection_2d

Reviewer: `kolena/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection`

poetry update && poetry install
```

> ## Dataset Upload

Reviewer: We should make these steps explicit by numbering them:

1. Register a Dataset
2. Upload Model Results
3. Investigate Model Performance
4. Create Quality Standards
5. Compare Models

These should all be action-oriented as well — see the section headers for the existing quickstart (which also should be numbered 🤔):

<img width="204" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-04 at 2 23 19 PM" src="https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/assets/9648886/36e7f0d8-b73b-48e8-bf59-8bc5e821199c">

Model evaluations on Kolena starts with datasets. Datasets are tables that contain the data you wish to use for
creating test cases.

=== "SDK"

    The example code contains a script `keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py` which will process the CSV
    file `s3://kolena-public-examples/300-`
    and register it as a dataset in Kolena using the `register_dataset` function.

    First, let's first configure our environment by populating the `KOLENA_TOKEN`
    environment variable. Visit the [:kolena-developer-16: Developer](https://app.kolena.io/redirect/developer) page to
    generate an API token and copy and paste the code snippet into your environment:

    ```shell
    export KOLENA_TOKEN="********"
    ```

    We can now register a new dataset using the provided script:

    ```shell
    poetry run python3 keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py
    ```

    After this script has completed, a new dataset named "300-W" will be created, which you can
    see in [:kolena-dataset-20: Datasets](https://app.kolena.io/redirect/datasets)

> === "Web App"

Reviewer 2: I think `Web App` should be first to promote it as the main way we'd expect users to ingest data into the platform.

Author: Agreed, changed.

>     To import the 300-W dataset, select “Import datasets” then “Select from cloud storage”. Using the explorer, navigate to

Reviewer 2: I almost feel like this makes the most sense with a Loom video

    s3://kolena-pubic-examples/300-W/ and select 300-W.csv.

>     Note: The keypoints in `300-W.csv` have been defined using `kolena.workflow.annotation.Keypoints` from

Reviewer 3: Does it mean that the example script should be using a different file, i.e. in the raw folder?

Author: Yes, that's my understanding of this thread https://kolena-io.slack.com/archives/C01GAKM1W5S/p1704394991235389

    the `kolena` SDK. See the `keypoint_detetction/upload_dataset.py` script for example usage.

    You will now see a preview of how the information is going to be consumed by Kolena.

    Give your dataset a name and select `locator` as the ID column. The ID column is used to uniquely identify a test
    sample and is used when uploading model results to associate inferences with test samples.

    Click “Confirm” to import the dataset. Once the dataset has been added, you can add description and tags to them to organize the workspace.

    *gif of dataset import workflow*

> ## Model Upload

Reviewer: Always "Model Results" in v1

# :kolena-flame-20: Quickstart

Install Kolena to set up rigorous and repeatable model testing in minutes.

In this quickstart guide, we will use the [300 Faces In the Wild (300-W)](https://ibug.doc.ic.ac.uk/resources/300-W/)
example dataset to demonstrate the how to curate test data and test models in Kolena, using both the web app and
the `kolena` Python SDK.

??? note "Using the SDK"
    If you would like to use the SDK for this quickstart follow these instructions to set up the
    SDK and set up the code example locally.

>     First ,install the `kolena` python SDK:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    First, install the `kolena` python SDK:
```

    === "`pip`"

        ```shell
        pip install kolena
        ```

    === "`poetry`"

        ```shell
        poetry add kolena
        ```

    Then, clone the example code:

    ```shell
    git clone https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena.git
    ```

    The [kolenaIO/kolena](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena) repository contains a number of example integrations to clone
    and run directly. Set up the keypoint detection example for this quickstart:

    ```shell
    cd kolena/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection
    poetry update && poetry install
    ```

## Step 1: Upload dataset

Model evaluations on Kolena starts with datasets. Datasets are tables that contain the data you wish to use for
creating test cases.

=== "Web App"

    To import the 300-W dataset, select “Import datasets” then “Select from cloud storage”. Using the explorer, navigate to

>     s3://kolena-pubic-examples/300-W/ and select 300-W.csv.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `s3://kolena-pubic-examples/300-W/` and select `300-W.csv`.
```

    ??? note "Generating Datasets"

>         See the [`keypoint_detetction/upload_dataset.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        See the [`keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py)
```

>         script in the code example for details on how the dataset is were generated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        script in the code example for details on how the dataset was generated.
```

    Note: The keypoints in `300-W.csv` have been defined using `kolena.workflow.annotation.Keypoints` from

>     the `kolena` SDK. See the `keypoint_detetction/upload_dataset.py` script for example usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the `kolena` SDK. See the `keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py` script for example usage.
```

Reviewer 2: Phrasing-wise, it also feels like this duplicates the previous callout a fair bit.

Author: That was intentional. I think this is warranted because we're directing users to do basically the same thing as we are in the previous callout.

    You will now see a preview of how the information is going to be consumed by Kolena.

    Give your dataset a name and select `locator` as the ID column. The ID column is used to uniquely identify a test

>     sample and is used when uploading model results to associate inferences with test samples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Give your dataset a name and select `locator` as the ID column. The ID column is used to uniquely identify a datapoint
    and is used when uploading model results to associate inferences with datapoints.
```

    Click “Confirm” to import the dataset. Once the dataset has been added, you can add description and tags to them to organize the workspace.

    <figure markdown>
        ![Example Dataset Upload](../assets/images/quickstart-upload-dataset-workflow.gif)
        <figcaption>Example Dataset Upload</figcaption>
    </figure>

=== "SDK"

>     The example code contains a script [`keypoint_detetction/upload_dataset.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The example code contains a script [`keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py)
```

    First, let's first configure our environment by populating the `KOLENA_TOKEN`
    environment variable. Visit the [:kolena-developer-16: Developer](https://app.kolena.io/redirect/developer) page to
    generate an API token and copy and paste the code snippet into your environment:

    ```shell
    export KOLENA_TOKEN="********"
    ```

    We can now register a new dataset using the provided script:

    ```shell
    poetry run python3 keypoint_detection/upload_dataset.py
    ```

    After this script has completed, a new dataset named "300-W" will be created, which you can
    see in [:kolena-dataset-20: Datasets](https://app.kolena.io/redirect/datasets).

## Step 2: Upload Model Results

Model results are supplied as tables containing the ID column chosen when uploading the dataset. For
this example, we will upload the results for the open-source [RetinaFace](https://github.com/serengil/retinaface) (`RetinaFace` option)
keypoint detection model and a random keypoint model.

=== "Web App"

    To upload new model results, from the Details tab of the dataset, click on “Upload Model Results” in the upper right.

>     Then, select “Upload from cloud storage”. Using the explorer, navigate to s3://kolena-public-datasets/300-W/results/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Then, select “Upload from cloud storage”. Using the explorer, navigate to `s3://kolena-public-datasets/300-W/results/`
```

>     and select `random.csv` This CSV file contains model results for the random keypoints

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    and select `random.csv`, This CSV file contains model results for the random keypoints
```

    model for each of the datapoints we uploaded to the dataset.

    ??? note "Generating Model Results"

>         See the [`keypoint_detetction/upload_results.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_results.py)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        See the [`keypoint_detection/upload_results.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_results.py)
```

        script in the code example for details on how results were generated.

    You will now see a preview of how Kolena will ingest the model results. Give your model a name, and click “Confirm” to
    upload the model results.

    <figure markdown>
        ![Example Results Upload](../assets/images/quickstart-upload-results-workflow.gif)
        <figcaption>Example Results Upload</figcaption>
    </figure>

    Repeat the above steps with the file `retinaface.csv`.

=== "SDK"

>     The example code contains a script [`keypoint_detetction/upload_results.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_results.py)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The example code contains a script [`keypoint_detection/upload_results.py`](https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/blob/trunk/examples/dataset/keypoint_detection/keypoint_detection/upload_results.py)
```

<figure markdown>
![Custom Plots](../assets/images/quickstart-otf-plotting.gif)
<figcaption>Custom Plots</figcaption>
</figure>

## Step 4: Define Quality Standards

Quality Standards define the criteria by which models are evaluated on each dataset. A Quality Standard consists of
Test Cases, which organize your data into key scenarios, and Metric, which define key performance indicators.

### Define Test Cases

To configure test cases, navigate to the "Quality Standards" tab and click on “Divide Dataset By”. Select
`datapoint.condition` to create test cases based on the condition field. Click the check mark to
save your test cases to your Quality Standard.

You will now see that your dataset has been organized into test cases based on the category field. Any Evaluation
Criteria you define will be calculated on each test case.

<figure markdown>
![Creating Test Cases](../assets/images/quickstart-create-test-cases.gif)
<figcaption>Creating Test Cases</figcaption>
</figure>

### Define Metrics

To configure Evaluation Criteria, from the Quality Standards tab, click "Add Metrics" and select `result.mse > mean`

> and `result.nmse > mean`.

Reviewer 2: - The gif for metrics you have in step 5 also seems to have `Lower is better` selected (which makes sense, since these are error metrics). We should include that as part of metrics definition.
- It might also be worth renaming the metrics, just to show that we can.

## Step 5: Compare Models

Once you have configured a Quality Standard, the Metrics you define will be calculated across all Test Cases.
To compare the results across models, navigate to the "Quality Standards" tab and add the "RetinaFace" and "random" models to the
table using the "Add Models" button in the top right. You will now see all metrics in the Quality Standard computed

> on every test case in the Quality Standard.

Reviewer 2: Might also be worth adding a blurb to highlight the coloration that exists on the page as well.

Reviewer 2: I thought it was odd that the `random` model was performing better than the `retinaface` model in your gif -- turns out the raw data file for `retinaface` had its keypoints in a different order from the group truth, which was causing higher errors than expected.

I've replaced the raw and results csv files for `retinaface` with the correct ones -- can you rerecord the last comparison gif for coloration + concluding that `retinaface` works better than `random`?
<img width="1651" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-05 at 19 37 30" src="https://github.com/kolenaIO/kolena/assets/2481598/5ca3986a-b73e-4c27-903b-574314a780fc">
